good afternoon and welcome to the
Downing Street
coronavirus daily briefing I'm joined
today by Professor Jonathan van tam the
deputy chief medical officer and by John
Newton our coordinator for testing today
I want to update you with the latest
plans for our programme of test track
and trace how we're going to use this
massive testing capability that we've
built in order to get our down and keep
our down before I do that I just want to
remind you of what we're trying to
achieve our plan is to slow the spread
and to protect the NHS so that the NHS
is always there for you and your family
whenever you need it
whether for coronavirus or anything else
that goal is working the number of spare
critical care beds in the NHS is 3413 on
the latest figures there have been 1
million 291,000 tests for coronavirus
including 85,000 186 tests on Sunday
yesterday a hundred and ninety thousand
584 people have now tested positive for
coronavirus an increase of three
thousand nine hundred and eighty-five
thirteen thousand two hundred and fifty
eight people are in hospital with
coronavirus and twenty eight thousand
seven hundred and thirty-four people
have died that's across all settings an
increase of 288 that figure is lower
than at any point since the end of March
but as with testing these reported
figures tend to be lower over the
weekend so we do do expect that number
to rise and remember this is not just a
number but it is a constant insistent
reminder that we must go further and
faster in our national effort in dealing
with this
virus over the last month we've built a
national testing infrastructure capable
of over a hundred thousand tests a day
today the capacity stands at a hundred
and eight thousand this means we're now
in a position to start implementing the
next part of our plan track and trace
the aim of test track and trace is to
hunt down and isolate the virus so it's
unable to reproduce and crucially test
track and trace allows us to take a more
targeted approach to lock down while
still safely containing the disease
creating this system is a huge national
undertaking of unprecedented scale and
complexity we've already taken Britain's
small but brilliant Diagnostics industry
and taken it to global scale we're
building an army of human contact
tracers who can man the phones and find
the contacts and support people and of
course we're developing the contact
tracing app which can help us deliver
test track and trace on the mass scale
that we need across the country the app
which takes full consideration of
privacy and security has already been
tested in closed conditions at an RAF
base and today I can announce the next
steps from tomorrow we will begin to
pilot test track and trace on the Isle
of Wight starting with health
professionals and rolling out this week
to all citizens I'm grateful to the huge
enthusiasm shown by Islanders who who
know that by participating in this pilot
they're at the forefront of helping get
Britain back on her feet where the Isle
of Wight goes Britain follows the island
has a single NHS trust one local
authority with the responsibilities for
Public Health a relatively low number of
Kovac cases and because it's an island
we can run this trial in proper
scientifically controlled conditions
comparing the effect with the effect and
with what's going on on the mainland
before we roll it out to the rest
to the country so here's how it'll work
last week we put in place the testing
capability on the island from tonight
the contact tracing capability will go
live and then tomorrow NHS staff on the
island will be able to download the app
and from Thursday each one of the 80,000
households on the island will get a
letter from the chief nurse with
comprehensive information about the
trial Islanders will then be asked to
install the app once you've installed
the app it'll start logging the distance
between your phone and other phones with
an app nearby it's been designed with a
form of Bluetooth that conserves power
so the app won't drain your battery and
this log of proximity information will
then be securely stored on your phone if
you become unwell with kovat symptoms
you inform the NHS via the app other app
users who you've had significant contact
with in the last few days will then be
sent an alert by the NHS along with
advice about what to do a test ordering
function will then be built-in if you're
watching this and you live on the Isle
of Wight I have a simple message please
download the app to protect the NHS and
save lives by downloading the app you're
protecting your own health you're
protecting the health of your loved ones
and the health of your community I know
the people of the Isle of Wight will
embrace this with enthusiasm because by
embarking on this project and by
embracing test track and trace you will
be saving lives the pilot is important
so we can help make sure the app works
as well as it possibly can alongside the
contact tracing system and with your
help we'll learn a lot we'll use it to
make things better and we want to hear
from you I want to stress and this is
really important that this trial does
not mean the end of social distancing on
the Isle of Wight or
where else for that matter we will only
change the social distancing rules once
our five tests are met so I'll end with
the instruction that we all know please
stay at home protect the NHS and save
lives or if you live on the Isle of
Wight stay at home install the app
protect the NHS and save lives I'll now
turn to Professor van tam to take us
through the day's chants John Thank You
Secretary stage so let's begin again
with refreshing the five tests that we
have in place for deciding if we're
going to adjust the lockdown the first
is around NHS capacity and we're in a
good position on that one the second one
is about a sustained and consistent fall
in daily deaths from coronavirus and it
is now very clear in the data that we
are past the peak the next one is solid
information that the rate of infection
is decreasing to manageable levels right
across the board
this is an indicator that we need to
keep a close eye on over the next few
days and weeks the fourth one is around
operational challenges around testing
and PPE and being able to meet future
demand there are continuing challenges
on PPE it is an absolute priority to
continue pushing on this to get it right
in the long run but of course in on
testing as you've heard from the
secretary of state we're in a very good
position and finally we have to be
confident that the adjustments we
contemplate are not going to risk a
second peak of infections and this is
really a matter of deep scientific
discussion very very close following an
absorbing of the evidence
and one that we're keeping under
detailed scientific review as the days
and weeks go by next slide please
now this slide actually shows search
data of people looking at Apple maps for
directions over driving over walking
routes or over using public transport
and it tells the same story as slides
you have seen before about how since we
announced these social distancing
measures the public continue to observe
the instructions to work with us to work
to protect the NHS and get case numbers
down and you can see very very
consistent trends over reduced searches
for driving instructions walking
instructions and use of public transport
so we need to keep going let's keep
going and continue to drop the curve
further next slide please
these are this is a graph showing from
the 6th of April through to the 4th of
May daily tests completed for
coronavirus and you can see on the right
hand side the latest data showing 85,000
tests completed on the 4th of May our
capacity is 108 thousand tests and there
is another lab opening next week
so this is all very encouraging tests
are going up people are using testing
services more and we are well within our
capacity capability next slide please
now this slide shows new cases of
coronavirus in the UK from the 21st of
March you can see that obvious peak up
to a high level in early April and then
you can see the pattern that has
occurred
in terms of new cases right up until the
fourth of May on this one I have to say
that new cases need to come down further
we have to continue to track this index
and we have to get cases lower if you
look to the next slide please
here we array the number of people in
hospital with kovat 19 from 17th of
March through to the 3rd of May and
after Peaks in the middle of April you
can see that in almost all areas now
there are steady but absolutely
consistent declines occurring possibly
in a small number of areas the trend is
somewhat flat but overall there are now
steady declines in the number of people
in hospital this is good news
following on please the next slide
critical care beds ICU beds here again
across all four nations you can see
largely continuing declines and possibly
a more important point if you look at
the axis on the left of the slide the
y-axis you can see where we are in terms
of capacity and there is plenty of ICU
capacity which is extremely good I turn
now to deaths in all settings and here
you can see that there is a slow but
consistent decline you will see the
weekend effect very clearly especially
if you look at the three steps on the
right-hand side of the chart fewer
deaths are actually recorded reported at
the weekends that's an artifact of the
way people report deaths but overall if
you look at the orange line the
seven-day and smoothed out rolling
average there is this slow but
consistent decline which is absolutely
going in the right direction now and
then the final slide is one we have
shown for some time showing a comparison
across countries
dating back to the day when fifty-fifty
cumulative deaths were recorded in each
of the countries and we're now quite
away across the slide 260 hour days in
some of the countries the message is the
same as I've said to you before that
there are kind of three broad trends on
this curve but I do want to emphasize to
you these are numbers they are not rates
they do not adjust for the size of the
underlying population and this is a
difficulty in interpreting these data we
will in the course of time be able to
get all caused age-adjusted excess
mortality for many of the countries on
this slide and that will give us a much
clearer understanding of what is going
on and hopefully those data will
continue for a long period of time so
that we can understand the fullness of
the picture as we try to beat this virus
I will stop there with the data and hand
back to the secretary of state thank you
very much Jonathan and we're now going
to take questions and the first question
from a member of the public we have a
video from sac Lane from London
what is being done to ensure that be am
a key workers are not disproportionately
affected by curve 819 and what steps are
being taken to provide support to the
families of those victims who are sadly
passed away Thank You Sakhalin an
incredibly important question to
impending incredibly important questions
both of which we're working hard to
address and I'm going to ask Jonathan to
set out the details but what I'd say
absolutely from the start is that we
recognize that there has been a
disproportionately high number of people
from black and ethnic minority
backgrounds who have passed away
especially amongst the care workers and
those in the NHS and I've I pay tribute
to them
before and I will do so again because
the NHS is an amazing organization that
has been built on the dedication of
people from all backgrounds and this
including many many who've come to this
country to to give their lives working
in the NHS and disproportionately
employs people from ethnic minority
backgrounds and yet we have seen this
impact in the data and I think it's
affected a lot of us working on it to
see that and so we've got a lot of work
going into fully understand
scientifically and make sure that in
every single case we learn what we can
to protect people better in terms of
support for the families of those who've
passed away for those working in the NHS
we have a we now have a program of
support that we've been able to put in
place that is there for everybody who
has say is from a family where where
somebody has died while since ervice and
including across pharmacy across social
can that's so that I think that's a
really important thing for us to do to
recognize the sacrifice of those put
themselves at risk by going to work in
this in what can be dangerous conditions
where they might be working with those
who have covered 19 Jonathan yes
I'm extremely sorry whenever I hear of a
healthcare worker death due to
coronavirus whether it's someone from a
black and minority ethnic group or
otherwise it doesn't change the fact
that it takes courage to work in the NHS
at a time like this and it's most
difficult on the subject of the signal
that we have so far on black and
minority ethnic groups I want to say to
you that we are taking it incredibly
seriously there is a very big piece of
scientific work
now ongoing that will report to the
chief medical officer and we'll get to
the bottom of this however long it takes
us but I will also say that this is a
complicated picture because when you
start to study patterns of disease
across different ethnic groups you also
have to take into account potential
differences in the age structure between
groups also differences in the patterns
of underlying medical conditions which
we know do vary by ethnic group and
therefore it's a complicated picture and
also deprivation has to be taken into
account where people live and all of
this is complex it takes time and I'm
not going to rush that answer I think we
owe it to minority ethnic groups to get
this right and get a clear signal for
you and you'll have worked out I'm from
an ethnic minority group and we will get
to the bottom of this it could be that
Professor Newton has some further
epidemiological granularity he'd like to
add on this point
thank you John well just to say that we
are as you say looking at the data very
carefully not just on ethnicity but also
on age sex and other factors such as
obesity which we know do have an impact
on the effect of coronavirus but it's
already clear from some of the published
data that the impacted in bmu groups is
greater that there are more people with
the infection and those who have the
infection have have worse outcomes in
many cases so there is already cause for
concern but as johnson says we're not
entirely entirely clear how much of that
is due to different levels of underlying
conditions or other risk factors so
there is work to be done and we will be
publishing this as soon as it's ready
thank you very much thank you psych lane
the next questions from Conrad from
Ashford and Conrad asks going forward
will the primary aim of test track and
trace be to squash the occurrence of
covered 19 infection to very low levels
or simply to flatten the curve enough
that the NHS is not overwhelmed and that
is a really
important question comrade the answer is
that test track and trace will help us
to get the are down and to get the
number of new cases down and to keep it
down but not on its own it's primarily
the social distancing measures that
we've taken so far that have flattened
the curve and now the we can see that
the curve is going down from the
presentation that Professor van Thanh
just gave the goal is to keep the number
of new infections going down and bring
in the test track and trace or at a
point which we will do well tomorrow
from tomorrow in the Isle of Wight and
then rolling out to the rest of the
country will will that we will get those
numbers down the test tracking trace
becomes more effective the lower the
number and then we want to keep the
number going down by keeping the are
below one the rate of infection so it is
not our goal is not simply to flatten
the curve it is to get the occurrence of
covered 19 infections to very low levels
to be absolutely clear within your
question that that is the answer thanks
very much and we'll now take questions
from the media upin from the BBC thank
you very much
when will you have recruited your 18,000
contact tracers and when will the full
test track and trace network be up and
running the aim is to have the whole
thing up and running in the by the
middle of this month if we're starting
already we've already started the
recruitment we have of the 18,000 we
have thousands already recruited and we
are making very rapid progress not only
in the recruitment but also the the
training that's necessary a short piece
of training and we have enough to get
going on the Isle of Wight in fact they
came on stream as of 5 o'clock this
evening so there that's up and running
now and then to roll out across the
country but there's no there's no magic
around the 18
thousand figure that is the initial
scale that we think is necessary if it
needs to be bigger when we find out from
the ONS survey that's in the field at
the moment what the prevalence of the
disease is the number of new cases per
day actually out there rather than that
that we find through positive tests then
we will then we'll adjust that figure
that's the initial goal but it'll be up
and running by the middle of the month
of course on business some businesses
will be required to have PPE for their
staff where will they procure it and
will they be in competition with the NHS
well this is a really important question
when we consider changes to the social
distancing measures the wider impact of
changes to social distancing measures
including for instance on PPE and the
first call on PPE must go to the NHS and
social care and those other essential
services who need it to keep the people
delivering those services safe and so
that is something that we take into
account it's in our five tests but it is
something that we're working very hard
on now of course it's our job in running
the health and social care system to
ensure that those areas and the other
public services have PPE but and there's
a worldwide shortage and as you say so
we do need to take that into
consideration before making before
making changes and that's why it's one
of the five tests thanks very much
Tom Clark from ITV Thank You Secretary
of State's and the most successful
contact tracing efforts around the world
like those of you now South Korea
Singapore were only partly reliant on
mobile phone technology in order to work
they were more reliant on large numbers
of volunteers on a community level going
out to track down and trace cases at
huge scale
has the government insured this capacity
is in place in the UK or are we putting
too much faith in call centres and in
untested it's a really important point
and I agree with the with the point in
the question which is that it isn't just
about the technology and the people in
call centres it's also about citizens
acting in the right way
acting in the right way to download the
app because that protects you and
protects your family and protects the
NHS but also acting in the right way to
do contact tracing yourself John really
good it's a really good point well made
the app is very exciting and the app
adds something extra that's some an
automated response that can be almost
immediate but as you say the program
that we're putting in place is an
integrated program with the app but also
with contact tracing driven by testing
so access to testing partly through the
app but also other routes to a test and
then the test result backed up by
contact tracing driven by public health
professionals at one level we've got
public health England but also a lot of
experience on the ground with directors
of Public Health and local authorities
environmental health officers who are
very expert in this exactly as you say
shoe-leather epidemiology out on the
streets
finding contacts and but even actually
what people call traditional contact
tracing isn't very traditional anymore
it's quite also it's quite highly
technical so we've developed a web-based
supports a contact tracing an advisory
service which has been ramped up to
support this and there's also another
line of defense through the telephone
call centre so it's a multi-layered
approach and one of the points of the
Isle of Wight test pilot is to try and
see how those different elements
integrate together to support each other
so it's a very good point we are
learning from the best practice around
the world but we also have something to
offer in the UK as well because we've
been doing this for a long time thanks
Tom I hope that answers your question
yes may have a quick follow up question
are we are we caught in something of a
catch-22 with contact tracing that as I
understand it the numbers of cases have
to fall quite a bit more before we can
reliably run it out
across the country but if we keep
lockdown measures in place which we have
to until your fifth test is met Lee it's
quite hard to pilot contact tracing
because most of us are trying to isolate
ourselves as much as possible so no it's
the short answer the and a lot of
slightly longer answer is that even with
social motor social distancing measures
there still are some new cases and the
and that means that the that the
technology can still be effective and
even with the scale of of of new cases
across the country contact tracing can
still have an impact and the app will
still be highly effective it's just more
effective the fewer the number of new
cases so these are all matters of degree
rather than absolute so we're not caught
in a in a in a catch-22 but it is
absolutely true that the social
distancing measures are the thing that
in doing they're having the big impact
and so the hence the you know the
message remains stay at home to protect
the NHS and save lives unless you're in
the Isle of Wight but in your even in
the Isle of Wight you should still stay
at home to protect the NHS and save
lives it's that you should also install
the app because that will help it this
to be yet more effective one final point
on this which is the Isle of Wight has a
slightly lower rate of covert new covert
infections than some other places in the
country and therefore actually is a that
makes it a good place to test this not
only is it good because it will help the
Isle of Wight but it is also good
because it has that slightly lower
number of new infections lockdown
measures until contact tracing is up and
running across the country no the two
aren't aren't necessarily linked like
that we haven't said that you we can't
make changes before it's up and running
it's just that the test track and trace
system will help us to get our down and
hold our down and the lower the number
of new cases the more effective it will
be but we haven't made a concrete link
that your question drew between the
number between the having this system of
in place nationally and making changes
to the social distancing measures we
there isn't a necessary link between the
two they're just they they do work in
tandem the next question is from Oliver
Dyer from Isle of Wight radio even in
all in a poll that Isle of Wight radio
ran today 80% of our listeners that they
would install this new app but the
island has a higher than average elderly
population who fall into the governments
of vulnerable category
how are you expecting those who don't
have a smartphone or can't use that
technology be it on the island or across
the country to get behind this and with
that in mind considering the islands has
an elderly population one of the
questions our listeners want to know is
why the islands been chosen over other
over as a UK islands allocations so look
that's a great set of questions Oliver
and I'm really really pleased to hear
that 80% of people said that they would
download the app and because the more
people who download the app the more
effective it's going to be because it's
a you need you need two people having
downloaded the app for it to be
effective for one to be able to tell the
other that they've been in close contact
with somebody who's got symptoms of
covered 19 and so I'm really pleased
that the people of the Isle of Wight
have responded today in this way I had a
feeling that they would and I'm really
glad that they have and but partly
because of the challenges that you set
out that not everybody has a motor
smartphone that that's that's another
reason actually to test it in the Isle
of Wight because if we tested it
somewhere where it would be easy we
wouldn't find as many of the challenges
rather than testing it somewhere where
you've got to do that you've got to have
the technology but you've got to have
the human
tracing as well they go they go hand in
hand they help each other and so that's
that is actually one of the things we
thought about before choosing the Isle
of Wight as their as the place to go
first yeah thank you I mean I think the
Isle of Wight is an ideal place to do
this it's quite a large population and
there is a benefit in the fact that
travel on and off the island is
relatively restricted the ferries are
there but they're running relatively
infrequently so it is an ideal place to
look at the epidemiology and see the
impact it's also I used to be the
Regional Director of Public Health for
South Central including the Isle of
Wight I know that the island the island
is is very well equipped to respond to
things that is it's a very coherent
group we've had tremendous support from
the local authority from the NHS from
the local MP and like everybody else I
think it's going to be a great success
as a as a pilot and your point about
elderly people I think we shouldn't
first you shouldn't make assumptions and
you know quite a lot of elderly people
are extremely tech savvy and quite happy
to use smartphones but we've also
recognized that there are other ways of
doing contact tracing so as I mentioned
we've built in a number of routes so
people don't have to have the app in
order to benefit but of course we will
all benefit if the app and the contact
tracing drives down the infection rate
it drives down the infection rate for
everybody and I think the third point to
say is that the people who are most
mobile and most likely to be out bumping
into each other are also the people who
are probably most likely to be using
smartphones so I think all in all we
think it's a strong program and we're
looking forward to seeing how it works
in your other white and that that survey
is extremely encouraging so thank you it
does yeah I'm gonna add one more
follow-up go ahead
fantastic so obviously whilst a lot of
people will love I love our radio
listeners in particular I have been
positive about the app there are some
concerns that the lockdown measures
could be lifted here early to form part
of that trial could lock down on the
Isle of Wight be lifted earlier than the
rest of the new tape and if so is it
safe to do so well I want to thank Isle
of Wight radio listeners for how much
they've engaged with this this this idea
today and I can reassure you that there
aren't any changes to social distance
measures that are proposed as part of
this pilot the pilot is to find out how
the app works how the interaction of
people then becomes recognized by the
technology and the the link from that to
the human contact tracing and to the
testing regime because there's a new
testing center on the Isle of Wight as
well so there aren't changes our
proposals are that changes to be to the
social distancing will only take place
when the five tests are met and that's
nationally rather than the Isle of Wight
having having any differences in that
part to the rest of the country thanks
very much indeed Oliver Joe Murphy from
the Evening Standard good afternoon
can I ask the scientists how has your
understanding of immunity developed over
the last month or so do you know yet
whether people will catch it again and
how are the tests developing how the
testing of the tests going do you see
antibodies and immunity playing a really
significant role in easing out of
lockdown or not and secretary state if I
could just ask a follow to Conrad's
question who asked how low the numbers
we go you said very low can you put a
figure on that the answer to the second
question is no and the answer to the
first question is and I'll say a little
and then I'll ask both scientists to
come in John on the testing and JBT on
the science of immunity what I'd say is
that antibody testing is incredibly
important we have antibody tests in the
field at the moment they're being used
for surveys they are lab based rather
than the rather than the automatic
response tests that we looked into in
great detail a month or so ago but then
none of them were effective enough to be
used for clinical reasons but
can still be used for surveys so we have
surveys in the field both with the the
stick tests and also with lab based
serology which detects antibodies so we
will be getting estimates soon of the
proportion of the population who have
the antibodies and the test tests for
whether the antibodies are there the
effect of the antibodies on your risk to
catching or transmitting corona virus in
the future is the is the next important
step in that and the science on that has
been rapidly developing and I asked jvt
to update on that yes thank you for the
question so on antibodies one of the
things we want to know is when you've
had in Kovac 19 infection do you get
antibodies do they protect you against
further instances of the same illness
and how long are they going to protect
you for so that's kind of three
questions really
so let's chop this up into three answers
and the first answer is the first thing
we wanted to know was once you've had
confirmed kovat 19 infection do you get
antibodies and one of the things that
we've been interested in and want to do
is call people back who've had a Ovid 19
for sure and who've recovered to ask
them if they'll begin to take part in a
program we're starting to get plasma
containing antibodies and use it for
treatment in the future in trials to
understand if it's going to work and
save lives and the good news on that is
that that program has started and the
overwhelming majority of people so far
called back who've had definite kovat 19
infection have got antibodies in their
blood stream which is a good news thing
so those antibodies take different times
in different people to develop the
large the signal is that people get
antibodies the next question is do those
antibodies protect you from further
infections and we just haven't had this
disease around on the planet in humans
for long enough to know the answers to
that with any surety and that's a piece
of science that we will just have to
follow a bit longer I hope the answer is
yes
but I think it's one where we have to be
much clearer before we can take that
responsibility of giving you a very
clear answer on that and then the final
piece is how long will the antibodies
last and we do know that for other
normal coronaviruses if that's the right
word the ones that are a couple of
viruses that together with many others
cause what we'd call the common cold
that those antibodies don't persist
necessarily for years and years and
years now it doesn't follow that that's
going to be the case with Kovach 19 we
do not know at this point we will have
to simply follow people who've recovered
and test them repeatedly until we have
an understanding of how long antibodies
last and how long they protect for but
there is an absolutely massive piece of
work now underway multiple studies to
look for antibodies in different
populations in the UK and indeed to
follow some people who've recovered for
long periods of time into the future at
least a couple of years and we will have
much clearer signals over time but I'm
afraid it's just one of those where we
can't make the science go any faster
than how quickly our bodies go in terms
of maintaining the antibodies and like
everybody else in the world we just have
to be patient and cautious until we get
those answers but I do believe in the
long run once we have those kind of
answers potentially antibody testing
will be a very important part
of our future strategy Thanks
in fact I'm in one of those trials so
because I was tested positive and now I
have the I have fairly regularly
somebody comes and takes blood to ensure
that to test whether I have antibodies
and then also to test whether I get it
again because we have surveys in the
field right now to test if people with
antibodies then catch the disease which
is an absolutely critical fact that will
then determine policy over what we say
people with antibodies who've tested
positive on an antibody test can do and
which is at the moment we don't yet have
the science to make those policy
decisions but it'll be absolutely
critical John did you have anything to
add on this just just briefly on the
testing there's been really very good
progress on the antibody test there are
at least two large commercial
organizations who develop good lab based
antibody tests which were currently
evaluating but also people looking at
ways in of doing antibody tests close to
the person the patient and there a
number of options there including a
saliva test and all of these options are
looking quite promising and being
evaluated so I think in general we can
say as we did as we thought that there
would be antibody tests available when
we needed them and they will support
also our contact tracing program and
strategy later on fantastic follow-up
and thank you all three for very
informative answers there so to state
life's full of risks and this is all
about balance of risks you're somebody
who's probably got antibodies would you
feel happy going into a crowded room not
yet not yet I very much hope that the
science shows that the people with
antibodies who tested positive for
having antibodies are have a low risk of
transmitting the disease and a low risk
of catching it both are important
because low risk of catching it to
protect me low risk of transmitting it
to protect others I hope that that's
where the science comes out that is true
of most corona viruses i but we've got
to make sure that we've got the science
because until
we know that's the case we can't be sure
of it we can't base a policy decision on
it and I can't be comfortable doing what
you mentioned in the question because
that might simply trigger a rise in the
number of infections if the science
turns out that to be wrong and there are
so many novel things about this
coronavirus the there are so many things
that are different to previous there's
the six existing corona viruses that we
do have to test this and not base our
assumptions on how other corona viruses
behave because you you know I we don't
want to take the risk of assuming this
corona virus behaves like other corona
viruses before saying and taking a
policy decision that people with
antibodies are lower risk but if the
science concludes that they that they
are then will take decisions on on that
basis and I would say this this point of
John's that there's been big advances in
antibody testing especially the lab
based antibody testing is very it's very
important today rush the Swiss global
Diagnostics company made a very positive
announcement about progress with their
antibody test and we're in discussions
with them about a very large-scale
rollout of antibody testing as well as
with some others who may be able to
bring this forward but there's been
false hope before in antibody testing
and so I will will make announcements
when we're absolutely ready thanks very
much Joe Paul wor from The Huffington
Post L secretary as you frequently said
the long term solution to this pandemic
is a fully scaled up vaccine for kovin
19 yeah but a vaccine relies on as many
people as possible actually taking it up
now you told HuffPost last year and i
quote there's a very strong argument for
having compulsory vaccinations for
children for when they go to school
because otherwise they're putting other
children at risk would that apply to a
covert vaccine as well as to MMR and
other vaccines and what other measures
are you looking at to ensure as many
adults and children take up the new
vaccine when it's available and if I can
to professor van Tam can I ask you what
you've made of the early academic
research done in Harvard Germany and
even Cambridge that suggests high levels
of air pollution may be one of the most
important contributors to the clustering
of deaths from kovat 19 is sage looking
at that or going to look at that thanks
Paul two very good questions on the
vaccine and the first and most important
thing is that we support the development
of the vaccine and you all have seen the
Prime Minister's excellent announcement
today and then that we also in short do
the work to ensure that people can get
access to the vaccines starting with
those who are most vulnerable and the on
the question of whether to make it
compulsory I think that the extent of
the public's reaction to following the
lockdown shows that we will be able to
achieve very very high levels of
vaccination without taking that step and
and so you know our task is to ensure
that it is in the first instance we
support the science as much as possible
because we called assume there'll be a
vaccine there is no coronavirus vaccine
yet and for any of the existing
coronaviruses and this is uncertain
science but whilst i don't rule anything
out i we're presuming we're proceeding
on the basis that just such a huge
proportion of the population are going
to take this up because of the obvious
benefits to individuals and their
families and their communities and
indeed the whole nation that there'll be
an enormous demand for it as and when
the science is safe to proceed Thank You
secretary so just to stay on the vaccine
question for a little longer and we are
following the developments in vaccine
research across the world including in
the UK we remain very hopeful that there
will be a breakthrough at some point in
the future I think what I can say to you
is that it is more likely than not that
the first facts
things will be licensed in adults in the
first instance and therefore one has to
take put some caveats around your
question around children and the other
thing to say is that so far the
epidemiological evidence is not showing
us that there is a massive burden of
disease or burden of mortality in
children it is actually completely at
the other end of the scale it is in the
elderly and so from that perspective
again that's another caveat I'd add to
your question about vaccinating children
on the second question about air
pollution and thank you for that I think
we already have very solid data that air
pollution contributes to a whole range
of mortality particularly from
respiratory illnesses and respiratory
diseases and cardiovascular disease I
have heard it said about air pollution
and kovat 19 I have not personally
studied those data and looked at that
question in detail but what you say is
entirely plausible in my view and
professor Newton may have some further
observations on air pollution well
they're only your general point that we
know that air pollution because it's so
pervasive and affects so many people
has a huge burden but like Jonathan I
haven't those papers but but I think
it's something that we will get back to
you yeah just one brief follow-up
Secretary of State you have a message
for those anti-vaxxers here and abroad
when we when and if we do get a vaccine
for kovat 19 I think there has been no
greater demonstration in modern history
that vaccines save lives than the need
for a vaccine to save lives and to get
the world going again following the
outbreak of kovat 19 and we will only
license a vaccine when it is both
effective and safe and when the
independent regulators
if and when the independent regulators
license a vaccine in this country they
will do so knowing that it will that it
is safe and everybody should follow that
everybody should follow that advice
thanks very much
finally we're going to go to Louise Hill
from the Isle of Wight County press
Thank You mr. secretary and as local
democracy reporter on the Isle of Wight
I have seen a mixed reaction to the app
but a main concern that keeps occurring
is whether you can ensure Island
residents who were wary of using the app
when this technology that their data
will be kept fully protected and private
throughout this trial and going forward
and the government will be fully
transparent with Islanders about the way
this app works yes absolutely this is an
incredibly important question I was very
glad to hear from Oliver from arlov
white radio that on his initial survey
there was a very high degree of support
for the for the app and for downloading
it but it has been the app has been
designed with privacy and security front
of mind it's been signed off by the
National Cyber Security Center who've
been involved in its development and I
want to thank them and pay tribute to
the work that they've done in ensuring
that the privacy and cybersecurity is
strong the data is stored on an
individual's phone not by the by the NHS
until somebody finds that they've got
symptoms and then they need a test and
so they need to connect to the NHS and
then you need to the NHS needs to
contact those who you've been in contact
with and so the the this has this has
the highest level of privacy built in to
make sure that we can both reassure
people in terms of privacy but also that
it can be effective and save lives
I don't know if you've got anything
exactly right so just to be absolutely
clear the app itself doesn't hold any
personal information it just has
information about the phone where it was
which other phones it's been
in contact with but only using
anonymized randomly generated numbers
and those are the data that are
collected so no personal information is
generally that is contained by the app
or generated by the app the circular
State the only personal information used
is when somebody approaches the NHS to
have a test or to have their contact
race so it is a it's a very safe use of
data and people really should feel very
reassured by all the precautions have
been taken thanks very much indeed thank
you from the island have you got a
follow-up so as you said earlier we're
told to look down won't be eased on the
island as part of the roller rollout of
this app does that that means people
already if they're at home or making
very limited trips and as the app is
predominantly aimed at the islands Keys
workers will that guarantee enough
useful data for the app going forward
this is a really important question that
we thought about when selecting where to
to trial it because there's a busy
hospital on the island and there's other
and key workers including those who work
for the council for instance and in the
other services and the right across the
board there are there are interactions
and there are new cases on the island
and so we think that that it will be
effective and it would be an effective
place to pilot but also we think that
the that the test track and trace system
as a whole will be more effective when
there are fewer new cases because then
when you do find a new case we can
really support that person find out who
they've been in contact with and then
contact all of those people and it's
quite a metallo of effort and support
into then trying to stop that case from
spreading any further so actually the
the the test track and trade system as a
whole will be more effective when
there's fewer cases and currently there
are fewer cases on the island than there
are in the rest of the country thank you
very much indeed thanks to for all the
from the public from the national media
from the Isle of Wight and and I'm very
grateful for this opportunity to have
set out these details of our test track
a test track and trace program and look
forward to seeing you again
here from here in Downing Street very
soon thanks very much